What is Web Assembly?
Like, really I've mentioned it
several times, but really, what is it?
Is it a language we code directly?
A little bit, yeah.
Is it a faster replacement for JavaScript?
No, it's a compliment to JavaScript
that works in tandem with it.
But really what it is, is a low level
language that we actually compile to.
It is meant to be compiled
from Assemblyscript or Rusts,
or C and
all these other languages into wasm.
And I'll say wasm Web Assembly,
I'll use them interchangeably.
If you see wasm it's short for
Web Assembly,
we're actually not meant to
write Web Assembly directly.
As we'll see later, we'll some examples
of what Web Assembly looks like.
Things will get complicated very quickly.
But I want you to know it
because if you read the blog,
you'll have to look at Web Assembly files.
But what it is,
is Web Assembly the secure sandbox
area that runs in near native speed,
almost runs at the speed of a program
that is written on the desktop itself.
But it's running in the browser, which is
pretty phenomenal cuz the browser actually
is a pretty high level abstraction
over the operating system itself.
Which is a high level abstraction
over axing the memory and CPU,
the registers and all that.
So the fact that Web Assembly can run
it almost that speed of application
written natively for a particular
platform, is pretty impressive.
The difference in, I know this is gonna
come up, and someone will ask you this,
so, why Web Assembly and not a web worker.
There's probably two main things.
One is Web Assembly can be cached, so we
can fetch our wasm file from the server.
It's instantiated and
then it's cached in memory,
versus a worker which has to be
instantiated every single time.
And as you know, Web Worker is a way of
spinning up a separate thread away from
the UI thread in JavaScript.
It's generally how we were
doing heavy computation before.
And there are pros and
cons to a worker versus Web Assembly.
But at the end of the day, remember
Web Assembly isn't necessarily written for
JavaScript engineers to
make our lives easier,
it's written for other types of languages
that compile down into Web Assembly.
And that to me is one of the bigger,
I think points of contention, and
points that people miss
about what Web Assembly is,
they're like, why wouldn't you use
a Web Worker, you can offload.
You can do a lot of the same
things in Web Worker.
You can do it in Web Assembly,
well, not same things, but
you can perform heavy calculations.
You don't block the UI thread.
You can pass information back and forth.
Yeah, there's definitely use case for
workers.
But Web Assembly isn't designed
to compete with workers.
It's designed for other languages compiled
down and we have this shared platform.
Is there nods is that everybody
understands that ,because I
think that's the biggest thing of like,
what is Web Assembly for?
What are we using it for?
Why not use these other features?
It's primarily designed to
run in other languages.
Okay, any questions on that?
All right, cool.
So this also confused me when I was first
looking into, what is Web Assembly?
So if you can't tell, I designed this
course around all of the questions that I
had when I was learning these things,
and I write them down.
So that when you run
in the same questions,
you hopefully won't have
the same problems I have.
When I saw that Web Assembly had
two different types of files.
I was like, what?
What, did it?
Nobody, man,
my jokes aren't landing today, all right.
So, Web Assembly there is the wasm file.
The .wasm file is the actual assembly
code, written in binary format,
that the machine will run.
It is not readable by humans.
It's just a bunch of hexs and
zeros, and things like that.
We're never gonna access it directly,
we're never gonna read it directly.
Fortunately, the good people
who created Web Assembly and
this giant committee of people.
They're like, well, it turns out
people wana debug their program, so
we can make them debug actual assembly
code like actual binary code.
Or we create another file
that goes alongside it.
And that's the wat file, the wat file is
a text format, it's readable by humans.
We only use it for editing and debugging.
But at the end of day, it's still
gonna get compiled to a wasm file, so
you can edit your wat file all day and
say you compile it back to wasm,
it doesn't really do anything.
It's interesting that it is a format that,
the wat file, that you're coding but
you're not actually coding anything,
until it's compiled the machine
can't run it at all.
It's purely for
us humans who can't read binary.
And, so all the files today,
when we talk about,
when we write some Web Assembly in a bit.
And when we see Web Assembly and
we see examples of it,
it's always in the wat format.
It's not in wasm format.
The wasm was what we're gonna
import into our browser later.
Okay, I want to clear it up, cuz it does.
When you look at Web Assembly it does
seem confusing, and it's a weird,
I don't know if there's other
languages that have that concept of.
There's two different formats,
like the actual code being run and
the actual code that you're writing.
And there are two different
files that you pull together or
that are sent down together.
So it's a little tricky, okay.
Also wat, is just funny,
it's a funny name for file format.